I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
ON THE NEWSHOUR TONIGHT: A GAME-
CHANGER IN THE FIGHT AGAINST
EBOLA, THE VACCINE THAT COULD
TRANSFORM HOW HEALTH WORKERS
CONTAIN OUTBREAKS.
THEN, THE NUCLEAR-ARMED
SUBMARINES THAT LURK DEEP
BENEATH THE OCEA REAN,DY TO
ATTACK AT MOMENT'S NOTICE.
HOW THE MILITARY PLANS TO BUILD
THE NEXT GENERATION OF
UNDERWATER DEFENSE.
>> ONE SUBMARINE CARRIES AT ITS
MINIMUM THE EQUIVALENT OF 600
HIROSHIMA'S.
IF THEY LAUNCH THOSE MISSILES,
IT WOULD BE A DESTRUCTIVE EVENT
BEYOND HISTORY.
>> Woodruff: AND IT'S FRIDAY.
MARK SHIELDS AND DAVID BROOKS
ANALYZE THE WEEK'S NEWS.
ALL THAT AND MORE ON TONIGHT'S
PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Woodruff: A WING FRAGMENT
DISCOVERED ON AN ISLAND IN THE
INDIAN OCEAN IS ON ITS WAY FOR
TESTING TO SEE IF IT BELONGS TO
A MISSING MALAYSIA AIRLINER.
THE DEBRIS WAS CAREFULLY
PACKAGED AND LOADED ONTO A CARGO
FLIGHT TODAY BOUND FOR SPECIAL
DEFENSE FACILITIES IN TOULOUSE,
FRANCE.
MEANWHILE, LOCALS SCOURED
REUNION ISLAND'S COASTLINE FOR
TRACES OF MORE DEBRIS.
AND AUSTRALIAN OFFICIALS-- WHO
ARE LEADING THE SEARCH FOR THE
PLANE-- URGED CAUTION ABOUT WHAT
THE WRECKAGE MEANS.
>> I'M NOT SURE THAT THIS
FINDING WILL ACTUALLY ENABLE ANY
REFINEMENT OF THE SEARCH AREA.
IT IS 16 MONTHS SINCE THE
AIRCRAFT DISAPPEARED, THIS PIECE
OF DEBRIS HAS TRAVELED A VERY,
VERY LONG WAY, SO I DON'T THINK
IT'LL BE POSSIBLE TO BACK TRACE
WHERE IT CAME FROM.
>> Woodruff: BOEING HAS
CONFIRMED THE DEBRIS IS A WING
PART KNOWN AS A "FLAPERON" AND
THE SERIAL NUMBER FOUND ON IT
BELONGS TO A BOEING 777.
HUNDREDS OF PEOPLE MOURNED A
PALESTINIAN TODDLER WHO BURNED
TO DEATH IN HIS WEST BANK HOME
IN A SUSPECTED ARSON SET BY
JEWISH EXTREMISTS.
TWO PALESTINIAN HOMES WERE
BURNED IN EARLY MORNING
FIREBOMBINGS.
THE TODDLER'S PARENTS AND FOUR-
YEAR-OLD BROTHER ARE IN CRITICAL
CONDITION.
PALESTINIAN PRESIDENT MAHMOUD
ABBAS BLAMED THE INCIDENT ON
ISRAEL'S SETTLEMENT POLICY.
ISRAEL'S SETTLEMENT POLICY. >> (
translated): WE WAKE UP
TO
>> (translated): WE
WAKE UP TO A CRIME OF THE
ISRAELIS.
A CRIME OF THE ISRAELIS.
IT IS A WAR CRIME AND A
HUMANITARIAN CRIME AT THE SAME
TIME, SO WE WILL NOT STAND
STILL, WE WILL NOT STAND STILL
AT ALL.
AS LONG AS THE OCCUPATION AND
SETTLEMENT EXIST THESE ACTS WILL
CONTINUE.
>> Woodruff: ISRAELI PRIME
MINISTER BENJAMIN NETANYAHU
VISITED THE FAMILY IN A TEL AVIV
HOSPITAL AND SAID HE'D MADE A
RARE CALL TO ABBAS TO EXPRESS
HIS OUTRAGE.
>> I TOLD HIM OF THIS VISIT AND
OF ISRAEL'S ABSOLUTE COMMITMENT
TO FIGHT THIS EVIL, TO FIND THE
PERPETRATORS, BRING THEM TO
JUSTICE.
WE HAVE TO CALM THE SPIRITS AND
RECOMMIT OURSELVES TO OUR JOINT
BATTLE AGAINST TERRORISM AND
EXTREMISM.
>> Woodruff: THE ATTACK SPURRED
CLASHES BETWEEN HAMAS SUPPORTERS
AND ISRAELI POLICE IN THE WEST
BANK CITY OF HEBRON.
PROTESTERS THREW ROCKS AT
ISRAELI VEHICLES AS SOLDIERS
FIRED GAS GRENADES TO DISPERSE
THE CROWD.
IN WASHINGTON, A WHITE HOUSE
SPOKESMAN CONDEMNED THE
INCIDENT, CALLING IT A "VICIOUS
TERRORIST ATTACK".
IN CHARLESTON, SOUTH CAROLINA,
THE WHITE SUSPECT IN THE
SHOOTING RAMPAGE AT A BLACK
CHURCH ENTERED A TEMPORARY NOT
GUILTY PLEA TODAY TO FEDERAL
HATE CRIME CHARGES.
21-YEAR-OLD DYLANN ROOF IS
ACCUSED OF KILLING NINE
WORSHIPPERS LAST MONTH.
ROOF INITIALLY WANTED TO ENTER A
GUILTY PLEA, BUT HIS LAWYER
ADVISED HIM TO WAIT UNTIL THE
GOVERNMENT DECIDES WHETHER TO
SEEK THE DEATH PENALTY.
THE NUMBER OF HOMICIDES IN
BALTIMORE SOARED TO A LEVEL NOT
SEEN IN MORE THAN FOUR DECADES.
43 MURDERS WERE RECORDED IN THE
MONTH OF JULY, MAKING IT THE
THIRD MOST DEADLY MONTH IN THE
CITY'S HISTORY.
AT THE SAME TIME, NON-FATAL
SHOOTINGS HAVE REACHED 366 THIS
YEAR, COMPARED TO 200 AT THE
SAME TIME LAST YEAR.
THE SPIKE IN KILLINGS COMES
THREE MONTHS AFTER RIOTS ERUPTED
IN RESPONSE TO THE DEATH OF
FREDDIE GRAY, WHO DIED IN POLICE
CUSTODY.
PRESIDENT OBAMA SIGNED A STOPGAP
MEASURE INTO LAW TODAY THAT
FUNDS THE NATION'S HIGHWAY AND
TRANSIT PROJECTS FOR THE NEXT
THREE MONTHS.
THE SHORT-TERM PATCH WAS ALL
CONGRESS COULD AGREE TO BEFORE
LEAVING FOR AN AUGUST RECESS.
MR. OBAMA SAID A LONG-TERM
SOLUTION IS WHAT THE COUNTRY
NEEDS.
>> WE CAN'T KEEP ON FUNDING
TRANSPORTATION BY THE SEAT OF
OUR PANTS THREE MONTHS AT A
TIME.
IT'S JUST NOT HOW GREATEST
COUNTRY ON EARTH SHOULD BE DOING
ITS BUSINESS.
I GUARANTEE YOU THIS IS NOT HOW
CHINA, GERMANY, AND OTHER
COUNTRIES AROUND THE WORLD,
OTHER BIG POWERFUL COUNTRIES
AROUND THE WORLD HANDLE THEIR
INFRASTRUCTURE.
>> Woodruff: THE SENATE DID PASS
A LONG-TERM TRANSPORTATION BILL
YESTERDAY, SETTING UP
DISCUSSIONS WITH THE HOUSE THIS
FALL ON HOW TO FUND TRANSPORT
PROJECTS OVER TIME.
A FORMER GOVERNOR OF VIRGINIA--
JIM GILMORE-- BECAME THE 17TH
REPUBLICAN TO ENTER THE RACE FOR
PRESIDENT.
HE EXPLAINED WHY HE'S RUNNING IN
SUCH A CROWDED FIELD IN A VIDEO
RELEASED ON YOUTUBE.
>> I'VE BEEN LOOKING FOR SOMEONE
TO ENTER THE RACE COMMITTED TO
MY BELIEF THAT AMERICA'S
ECONOMIC AND NATIONAL SECURITY
IS INCREASINGLY AT RISK.
BUT I HAVEN'T SEEN A RESPONSE
FROM ANYONE THAT MAKES ME
CERTAIN ABOUT THEIR KNOWLEDGE OR
SOLUTIONS TO THE THREATS FACING
OUR NATION.
I DO NOT SEEK THE PRESIDENCY
BECAUSE I WANT TO BE SOMETHING.
I SEEK IT BECAUSE I WANT TO DO
SOMETHING FOR AMERICA.
>> Woodruff: GILMORE SERVED AS
VIRGINIA'S GOVERNOR FROM 1998 TO
2002, AND HE LAUNCHED A BRIEF
PRESIDENTIAL BID IN 2008.
WALL STREET POSTED SMALL LOSSES
TODAY.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
LOST 56 POINTS TO CLOSE AT
17,689.
THE NASDAQ FELL LESS THAN A
POINT.
THE S&P 500 DROPPED MORE THAN
FOUR POINTS.
FOR THE WEEK: THE DOW AND NASDAQ
EACH GAINED NEARLY ONE PERCENT
AND THE S&P ADDED 1.2%.
DESPITE ITS LACK OF NATURAL
SNOW, CHINA'S CAPITAL CITY WON
THE RIGHT TO HOST THE WINTER
2022 OLYMPICS TODAY.
THE ANNOUNCEMENT CAME DURING AN
ELABORATE CEREMONY IN KUALA
LUMPUR, MALAYSIA.
THE INTERNATIONAL OLYMPIC
COMMITTEE PICKED BEIJING OVER
ALMATY, KAZAKHSTAN.
BEIJING WILL BE THE FIRST CITY
TO HOST BOTH THE SUMMER AND
WINTER OLYMPICS.
STILL TO COME ON THE NEWSHOUR: A
PROMISING TRIAL FOR AN EBOLA
VACCINE, A PRISON-TO-COLLEGE
PIPELINE, OPENING DOORS TO
HIGHER ED FOR INMATES AND MUCH
MORE.
NOW A POTENTIALLY EXCITING
DEVELOPMENT IN THE SEARCH FOR AN
EBOLA VACCINE-- AND TO HARI
SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: RESULTS OF A
CLINICAL TRIAL CONDUCTED IN THE
WEST AFRICAN COUNTRY OF GUINEA
AND PUBLISHED TODAY IN THE
MEDICAL JOURNAL "LANCET" FOUND
AN EXPERIMENTAL VACCINE WAS 75%-
TO-100% EFFECTIVE IN BLOCKING
NEW INFECTIONS OF THE EBOLA
VIRUS.
THE TRIAL INVOLVED MORE THAN
7,000 PEOPLE, OVER 3,500 OF WHOM
WERE VACCINATED.
GUINEA IS ONE OF THREE WEST
AFRICAN COUNTRIES THAT MARKED
THE EPICENTER OF THE 2014 EBOLA
OUTBREAK THAT KILLED MORE THAN
10,000 PEOPLE.
FOR MORE ON EFFORTS TO CREATE A
VACCINE AND ON THIS TRIAL, I AM
JOINED BY DR. ANTHONY FAUCI,
DIRECTOR OF THE NATIONAL
INSTITUTE OF ALLERGY AND
INFECTIOUS DISEASE AT THE
NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH.
SO THERE ARE SEVERAL DIFFERENT
COMPANIES AND PEOPLE WORKING ON
VENUS, INCLUDING A MEMBER OF
YOUR TEAM BURKS TODAY WE HEAR
WORD LIKE "GAME CHANGER," YOU
KNOW, THESE ARE SIGNIFICANT
RESULTS.
WHY WAS THIS SO IMPORTANT?
>> WELL, IT'S SIGNIFICANT
BECAUSE OF THE OUTCOME OF THE
TRIAL.
IT SHOWED RATHER IMPRESSIVE
RESULTS.
NOW, IT WAS DONE UNDER VERY
DIFFICULT CIRCUMSTANCES, SO
THAT'S REALLY VERY IMPORTANT.
IT WAS DONE RIGHT DURING THE
INTENSITY OF THE OUTBREAK
ITSELF, AND THE DATA THAT HAVE
BEEN RELEASED TODAY SHOW THAT
THE RESULTS ARE REALLY QUITE
FAVORABLE.
THERE IS STILL A LOT OF WORK TO
BE DONE TO DETERMINE, IN FACT,
IF THIS PROTECTION AGAINST EBOLA
IS DURABLE, MAINLY THAT IT CAN
LAST FOR SEVERAL MONTHS, BECAUSE
WE CERTAINLY WOULD LIKE TO HAVE
THIS AVAILABLE FOR FUTURE
OUTBREAKS, AND INEVITABLY THERE
WILL BE FUTURE OUTBREAKS OF
EBOLA.
SO THIS IS AN IMPORTANT STEP IN
OUR ARMORY OF PREVENTING EBOLA
INFECTION IN ADDITION TO THE
PUBLIC HEALTH MEASURE TO PREVENT
INFECTION.
>> Sreenivasan: HOW DID THEY
FIGURE OUT THIS WAS EFFECT
SNIFF.
>> A VERY INTERESTING DESIGN TO
THE STUDY.
IT'S CALLED A RING VACCINATION
STUDY, RING MEANING YOU CREATE A
RING AROUND AN INDEX CASE OF
WHEN SOMEONE GETS INFECTED, AND
YOU JACKS NATE THE CONTACTS OF
THAT PERSON AND THE CONTACTS OF
THE CONTACTS.
BUT THE THING ABOUT THE RING
STUDY IS IT WAS RANDOMIZED, SO
THAT WHEN THEY IDENTIFIED A CASE
OF EBOLA, THEY HAD TWO RINGS,
ONE IN WHICH GOT VACCINATED
NEED, AND ONE WHICH GOT
VACCINATED 21 DAYS AFTERWARD,
AND THEN THEY COMPARED THE
NUMBER OF INFECTIONS IN THOSE
WHO WERE VACCINATED IMMEDIATELY
VERSUS THOSE WHO HAD A DELAY TOF
21 DAYS, AND THE RESULTS ARE
RATHER IMPRESSIVE BECAUSE THE
NUMBER OF EBOLA INNEKSZ THE
PEOPLE VACCINATED IMMEDIATELY
WERE ZERO, AND THE NUMBER OF
INFECTIONS FOR THOSE WHO WERE
VACCINATED ON A DELAYED BASIS
WAS 17.
RELATIVELY SPEAKING, THIS IS AN
INTERIM ANALYSIS OF RESULTS, BUT
IT'S STILL RATHER IMPRESSIVE.
NOW WE'RE GOING TO HAVE TO LOOK
AT THE DETAILS OF THE DATA TO
REALLY DELVE INTO WHAT IT MEANS.
BUT HAVING SAID THAT, IT'S
IMPORTANT THAT THE RESULTS CAME
OUT THIS WAY.
>> Sreenivasan: YOU ALLUDED TO
THIS EARLIER.
THIS IS IN THE MIDDLE OF AN
EPIDEMIC.
THITHIS ISN'T OUR DEFINITION OFA
GOLD STANDARD OF A CLINICAL
TRIAL WHEN YOU GIVE SOME PEOPLE
MEDICINE AND SOME A PLACEBO.
I GUESS IT'S SOMEWHAT UNETHICAL
NOT TO GIVE SOMEONE MEDICATION
WHEN YOU SEE PEOPLE DAYING
WITHIN DAYS OF CONTRACTING THE
VIRUS.
>> IF YOU DON'T KNOW WHAT WORKS
AND YOU DO A CONTROLLED TRIAL,
THEN YOU GET INFORMED CONSENT
ABOUT HOW YOU'RE GOING TO DO THE
TRIAL AND IT IS REALLY QUITE
ETHICAL.
SO I THINK THIS DESIGN WAS AN
INTERESTING NOVEL DESIGN.
IT'S FASHIONED AFTER THE DESIGN
OF HOW WE APPROACH SMALLPOX AND
THE ELIMINATION OF SMALLPOX.
IT WAS A CREATIVE DESIGN THAT
WAS DONE UNDER DIFFICULT
CIRCUMSTANCES.
>> Sreenivasan: WHEN PEOPLE
THINK OF VACCINES, THEY ALSO
THINK OF THINGS THAT ACTUALLY
HAVE THE VIRUS IN IT.
DID THIS VIRUS HAVE EBOLA IN IT?
>> NO, IT DID NOT.
IT HAD A PROTEIN OF EBOLA.
SO LET ME EXPLAIN WHAT IT IS.
A VIRUS WAS USED WHICH WAS A
VIRUS THAT INFECTS ANIMALSND A
RARELY INFECTS HUMANS.
WHAT THE VIRUS WAS IS YOU TOOK
ONE GENE OF EBOLA AND INSERTED
IT INTO THIS OTHER VIRUS AND
THEN INJECTED THIS OTHER VIRUS
INTO THE VEI VACCINE RECIPIENTS.
ONCE IT GOT IN THEM IT STARTED
MAKING THE EBOLA PROTEIN, SO
NONE OF THE INDIVIDUALS GOT THE
EBOLA VIRUS ITSELF.
THEY GOT THE PROTEIN OF EBOLA
THAT WAS GIVEN TO THEM THROUGH
THIS VECTOR OR CARRIER VIRUS.
>> Sreenivasan: DR. ANTHONY
FAUCI FROM THE NATIONAL
INSTITUTES OF HEALTH, THANKS FOR
JOINING US.
>> GOOD TO BE WITH YOU.
>> Woodruff: TODAY THE SECRETARY
OF EDUCATION AND ATTORNEY
GENERAL OF THE U.S. PROPOSED A
MAJOR SHIFT IN POLICY.
AFTER A 20-YEAR BAN, SOME
FEDERAL AND STATE INMATES COULD
BECOME ELIGIBLE FOR PELL GRANT
MONEY TO TAKE COLLEGE CLASSES
WHILE BEHIND BARS.
OUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT FOR
EDUCATION, JOHN MERROW REPORTS
ON AN EARLIER PILOT PROGRAM TO
CREATE A "PRISON-TO-COLLEGE"
PIPELINE.
>> I'VE BEEN IN PRISON SINCE I
WAS 16.
I'M 34 NOW.
>> I'VE BEEN LOCKED UP FIVE
YEARS.
I'VE BEEN IN THIS JAIL THREE
>> I'VE SPENT 21 YEARS IN
PRISON.
I WAS ARRESTED AT THE AGE OF 17.
>> I'VE BEEN INCARCERATED 21
YEARS NOW.
I'M 39 YEARS OLD.
>> I'M IN JAIL FOR MURDER.
>> TWO DRUG SALES AND A BURGLARY
CHARGE.
>> FOR HOMICIDE.
>> TAKING SOMEONE'S LIFE.
>> Reporter: MANY PEOPLE WOULD
SAY, "HEY, THEY DID THE CRIME,
SO LET THEM DO THE TIME."
BUT THIS WOMAN BELIEVES THAT, IF
PRISONERS ARE GOING TO CHANGE
THEIR WAYS, THEY NEED AN
EDUCATION.
>> WE SEE EDUCATION AS INTEGRAL
TO THE REENTRY PROCESS.
>> Reporter: AND SO THESE MEN
ARE STUDYING SHAKESPEARE.
>> WERE YOU ABLE TO SEE SOME OF
THESE THEMES, MOTIFS, AND
SYMBOLS?
OKAY, GOOD.
>> Reporter: TODAY THEY'RE
ANALYZING "OTHELLO" IN ERIN
KAPLAN'S INTRODUCTORY ENGLISH
CLASS.
>> THE FACT THAT OTHELLO'S A
FOREIGNER AND THE FACT THAT HE'S
IN A HIGHER OFFICE, AND HAS A
HIGHER PRESTIGE WIFE MAKES HIM
WANNA DO THIS BECAUSE HE FEELS
THAT HE SHOULD HAVE ALL OF THIS.
>> I TOOK IT AS WHEN THE DUKE
MADE THAT STATEMENT, WHAT HE WAS
SAYING BECAUSE THEY KEPT
DESCRIBING OTHELLO ESPECIALLY
IAGO AND HIM AS A MOOR AS BEING
EVIL, BLACK IS DEVILISH, AS YOU
KNOW, THIS THICK-LIPPED PERSON
AND SO ON AND SO FORTH.
>> Reporter: THESE 12 MEN ARE
INCARCERATED AT A NEW YORK STATE
CORRECTIONAL FACILITY IN
OTISVILLE.
>> IF IT NOT BE FOR SOME PURPOSE
OF IMPORT GIVE IT ME AGAIN.
POOR LADY.
SHE RUN MAD WHEN SHE WILL LACK
IT.
>> Reporter: THIS CLASS, AND
FIVE OTHERS LE ITIK, ARE PART OF
A PILOT PROGRAM CALLED "THE
PRISON TO COLLEGE PIPELINE."
TO ENROLL, PRISONERS MUST HAVE
FINISHED HIGH SCHOOL, PASS A
READING AND WRITING ASSESSMENT,
AND BE ELIGIBLE FOR RELEASE
WITHIN FIVE YEARS.
>> WE HAVE THIS IDEA THAT,
POSSIBLY, IN THE THREE TO FIVE
YEARS PRIOR TO RELEASE, WE WANT
TO SEIZE ON THE HIGH
EXPECTATIONS, THE HIGH HOPES,
THE ANTICIPATIONS OF COMING
HOME, TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THAT
HOPE AND TURN IT TO EDUCATION.
>> Reporter: BAZ DREISINGER
FOUNDED THE PROGRAM IN THE FALL
OF 2011 WITH JUST 14 STUDENTS.
IT'S A COLLABORATION AMONG JOHN
JAY COLLEGE OF CRIMINAL JUSTICE,
HOSTOS COMMUNITY COLLEGE, AND
THE NEW YORK STATE DEPARTMENT OF
CORRECTIONS AND COMMUNITY
SUPERVISION.
THE COST, ABOUT $3,500 PER
STUDENT, IS COVERED BY PRIVATE
AND PUBLIC SOURCES.
IT COSTS NEW YORK STATE ABOUT
$60,000 A YEAR TO KEEP A PERSON
IN PRISON.
>> HE'S COMFORTABLE IN MILITARY
TACTICS.
>> HE'S CONFIDENT.
>> YOU UNDERSTAND?
>> AS A WARRIOR.
>> EXACTLY.
>> Reporter: EDUCATIONAL
OPPORTUNITIES BEHIND BARS ARE
VERY RARE.
TWO-THIRDS OF CORRECTIONAL
FACILITIES DO NOT OFFER COLLEGE
COURSES.
WHERE PROGRAMS DO EXIST, MANY
ARE LIKE BAZ'S: VERY SMALL.
TODAY, OF THE 1.6 MILLION MEN
AND WOMEN IN PRISON, ONLY ABOUT
35,000 ARE TAKING COLLEGE
COURSES.
>> AND IT COULD ALSO BE AS FAR
AS HIS MENTALITY, HIS MORALS AND
PRINCIPLES, THE FACT THAT HE'S A
GENERAL WITHIN THE ARMY.
>> Reporter: FOR MANY, THIS IS
THEIR FIRST COLLEGE CLASS.
>> I NEVER, ACTUALLY, HAD THE
OPPORTUNITY TO TAKE COLLEGE.
I CONSIDER MYSELF A GOOD
STUDENT-- ALWAYS DID.
>> Reporter: BUT IT'S NOT THEIR
FIRST TIME IN PRISON.
>> I WENT OUT AND COMMITTED A
CRIME AND CAME BACK.
>> Reporter: WILL TERRY'S
EXPERIENCE IS TYPICAL.
55% OF PRISONERS END UP BACK
BEHIND BARS WITHIN FIVE YEARS OF
THEIR RELEASE.
>> AND THE DOUBT CAME FROM
SOMEBODY ELSE.
>> Reporter: THE PROGRAM GIVES
PRISONERS THE OPPORTUNITY TO
DEVELOP NEW IDENTITIES-- AS
STUDENTS.
>> I'VE BEEN OUT OF SCHOOL FOR A
VERY LONG TIME, SO BECOMING A
STUDENT AGAIN IS-- IT HAS REALLY
BEEN QUITE A RIDE, BUT I ENJOY
IT.
I LIKE THE CHALLENGE.
IT GIVES YOU A SELF WORTH THAT
IS UNSPEAKABLE.
IT'S VERY NICE.
>> THE STUDENTS WANT TO BE
EDITED.
THEY WANT TO BE TAUGHT.
THEY WANT TO DOUBLE THE LENGTH
OF THE READINGS.
THEY WANT YOU TO CRITIQUE THEIR
PAPERS TEN TIMES OVER.
PART OF IT IS THAT YOU'VE BEEN
IN AN INTELLECTUAL VOID FOR SO
LONG THAT YOU'RE HUNGRY FOR THIS
KNOWLEDGE, AND THE OTHER PART OF
IT IS THAT THE STAKES ARE VERY
HIGH AS THEY SEE IT.
THEY KNOW THAT THEY'RE RE-
DEFINING THEMSELVES VIA
EDUCATION AND THEY TAKE IT
REALLY SERIOUSLY.
>> IT'S IN ACT 1 OF SCENE 3 OF
781.
>> WHAT LINE?
>> Reporter: SUCCESS INSIDE
MEANOPPOS RTUNITY OUTSIDE.
STUDENTS WHO DO WELL ARE
GUARANTEED ADMISSION INTO ONE
THE 18 COLLEGES THAT MAKE UP THE
C.U.N.Y. SYSTEM.
>> I LIKE TO DESCRIBE THE
PRISON-TO-COLLEGE-PIPELINE AS A
COLLEGE AND RE-ENTRY PROGRAM AND
A COLLEGE AS RE-ENTRY PROGRAM.
SO THE PROGRAM STARTS INSIDE AND
COMPLETES OUTSIDE, AND I THINK
ONE OF THE REASONS WHY THAT'S SO
POWERFUL IS THAT YOU BENEFIT
FROM GETTING SOME COLLEGE
EDUCATION INSIDE, BUT YOU ALSO
BENEFIT FROM HAVING A REAL
CAMPUS EXPERIENCE AND BEING IN A
COLLEGE WHEN YOU COME OUT.
>> I KNOW HOW MUCH A SUPPORT
SYSTEM IS IMPORTANT.
TO BE ABLE TO BE AFFORDED AN
OPPORTUNITY TO GO SOMEWHERE AND
MEET WITH PEOPLE THAT WE ALREADY
ESTABLISHED RELATIONSHIPS WITH,
LIKE BAZ.
THEY'RE NOT JUST SAYING "GET THE
HELL OUT."
WE ACTUALLY HAVE PEOPLE THAT'S
OUT THERE ROOTING FOR US.
THAT'S GONNA HOLD US DOWN NO
>> Reporter: BUT PROVIDING
PRISONERS WITH COLLEGE
OPPORTUNITIES IS NOT A POPULAR
IDEA.
NEW YORK GOVERNOR ANDREW CUOMO
INTRODUCED A PLAN TO PUBLICLY
FUND COLLEGE PROGRAMS IN TEN
STATE PRISONS.
IT FACED OPPOSITION FROM BOTH
PARTIES AND WAS QUICKLY SHOT
DOWN.
RESEARCH INDICATES THAT
PRISONERS WHO PARTICIPATE IN
CORRECTIONAL POST-SECONDARY
EDUCATION PROGRAMS ARE 51% LESS
LIKELY TO BE RE-INCARCERATED.
IT'S TOO SOON TO KNOW IF THIS
PROGRAM WILL BE SUCCESSFUL
BECAUSE ONLY 36 MEN HAVE
PARTICIPATED.
>> IT'S HARD TO TALK ABOUT
NUMBERS AND PERCENTAGES, BECAUSE
THE PROGRAM IS SO SMALL AND
WE'VE JUST STARTED.
>> Reporter: SEVEN OF THE 12
STUDENTS HAVE BEEN RELEASED, AND
SIX ARE ALREADY ENROLLED IN
COLLEGE, OR ARE APPLYING FOR
ADMISSION.
ONLY ONE IS BACK IN PRISON.
REPORTING FOR THE PBS NEWSHOUR,
I'M JOHN MERROW, IN OTISVILLE,
NEW YORK.
>> Woodruff: STAY WITH US.
COMING UP ON THE NEWSHOUR:
THE MILITARY'S PLAN TO REPLACE
AN AGING FLEET OF SUBMARINES
ARMED WITH NUCLEAR WEAPONS, MARK
SHIELDS AND DAVID BROOKS ANALYZE
THE WEEK'S NEWS AND HOW DEBATES
BETWEEN GORE VIDAL AND WILLIAM
F. BUCKLEY CHANGED TELEVISION
AND POLITICAL DISCOURSE IN
AMERICA.
BUT FIRST, SCHOOLS FOR STUDENTS
WITH DISABILITIES AND BEHAVIORAL
ISSUES IN THE STATE OF GEORGIA
ARE UNDER SCRUTINY.
IN A TWO-YEAR LONG
INVESTIGATION, THE U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE FOUND
GEORGIA IS ILLEGALLY SEGREGATING
THESE STUDENTS.
SOME OF THE PROGRAMS ARE EVEN
HOUSED IN DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS
ONCE USED AS ALL-BLACK SCHOOLS
DURING THE JIM CROW ERA.
ALAN JUDD IS AN INVESTIGATIVE
REPORTER FOR THE ATLANTA JOURNAL
CONSTITUTION.
HE HAS WRITTEN ABOUT THE SCHOOLS
AND THE JUSTICE DEPARTMENT'S
FINDINGS.
ALAN JUDD, WE WELCOME YOU.
SO WHO ARE THESE STUDENTS THAT
THE STATE OF GEORGIA IS PUTTING
IN A SEPARATE EDUCATIONAL
PROGRAM?
>> AT ANY GIVEN TIME, THERE MAY
BE ABOUT 5,000 OF THEM.
THEY ARE STUDENTS WHO HAVE -- OF
VARYING AGES WHO HAVE BEHAVIORAL
ISSUES, MENTAL HEALTH ISSUES,
WHO MAYBE ARE IN THE AUTISM
SPECTRUM, BUT THEY ARE CHILDREN
WHO HAVE BEEN DEEMED DIFFICULT
TO CONTROL AND DIFFICULT TO
EDUCATE BY THEIR HOME SCHOOLS.
>> Woodruff: AND HOW IS THE
PROGRAM FOR THEM DIFFERENT FROM
THE MAINSTREAM GENERAL EDUCATION
K-12 OPPORTUNITY THAT THE STATE
OF GEORGIA OFFERS CHILDREN?
>> FIRST OF ALL, MANY ARE
SEGREGATED ENTIRELY FROM THE
MAINSTREAM CLASSES, FROM THEIR
REGULAR EDUCATION PEERS.
THEY OFTEN DO NOT HAVE SCIENCE
LABS, THEY DON'T HAVE ART
CLASSES, MUSIC CLASSES, THEY MAY
NOT HAVE ACCESS TO A GYMNASIUM.
THE REPORT BY THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT FOUND THAT AT LEAST
ONE SCHOOL ACTUALLY HAS
SEGREGATED RESTROOMS FOR THESE
STUDENTS, A SEPARATE LUNCH
PERIOD, A SEPARATE ENTRANCE TO
THE BUILDING FROM OTHER STUDENTS
WHERE THEY ACTUALLY GO THROUGH A
METAL DETECTOR WHERE OTHER
STUDENTS DON'T.
ANOTHER ONE OF THE SCHOOLS KEEPS
THEM IN THE BASEMENT ALL DAY SO
THEY'RE NOT EVEN ALLOWED TO BE
IN THE SIGHT OF OTHER STUDENTS.
>> Woodruff: THERE ARE SOME
PRETTY TERRIBLE EXAMPLES THAT
YOU'VE WRITTEN ABOUT BOTH WHAT'S
BEEN GOING ON MORE RECENTLY AND
THEN A REALLY HORRIFIC THING
THAT HAPPENED BACK ABOUT TEN OR
ELEVEN YEARS AGO WITH A
13-YEAR-OLD IN GEORGIA.
>> RIGHT.
JONATHAN KING WITH YOU, AS YOU
SAID, A -- JONATHAN KING WAS A
13-YEAR-OLD ASSIGNED TO ONE OF
THESE SCHOOLS IN GAINESVILLE,
GEORGIA, NORTHEAST OF ATLANTA.
HE HAD BEEN KEPT IN A SECLUSION
ROOM, WHICH IS BASICALLY A
HOLDING CELL.
IT'S A CONCRETE BLOCK ROOM WITH
NO WINDOWS, NO WATER, NO REST
ROOM FACILITIES, NOTHING.
HE HAD BEEN KEPT IN THERE, I
THINK, 15 TIMES IN 29 DAYS FOR
AN AVERAGE OF 94 MINUTES AT A
TIME IN SOLITAIRE CONFINEMENT.
HE TWICE THREATENED SUICIDE, AND
ON ONE PARTICULAR DAY HE WAS
PLACED IN THAT ROOM AND ALLOWED
TO KEEP A SMALL PIECE OF ROPE HE
WAS USING TO HOLD UP HIS PANTS
AS A BELT AND PROMPTLY HANGED
HIMSELF.
>> Woodruff: WHAT IS THE
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT SAYING THE
STATE OF GEORGIA HAS TO DO?
>> THEY'RE NOT GIVING SPECIFIC
INSTRUCTIONS BUT EXPECTING A
SIGNIFICANT REPLY, I BELIEVE,
FROM STATE OFFICIALS.
MAINLY, IT WOULD BE TO FIND WAYS
TO DESEGREGATE THE SYSTEM.
THEN IT MAY MEAN CLOSING IT DOWN
ALTOGETHER, MAY MEAN
MAINSTREAMING MORE CHILDREN THAN
WE'RE DOING NOW, COULD MEAN
POSSIBLY FINDING PRIVATE
FACILITIES THAT WOULD TAKE SOME
OF THESE CHILDREN AND EDUCATE
THEM.
>> Woodruff: ALAN JUDD, HOW
DIFFERENT IS THE WAY GEORGIA
HANDLES THESE CHILDREN FROM MOST
OTHER STATES?
>> THE TREND FOR THE LAST COUPLE
OF DECADES OR MORE HAS BEEN TO
MAINSTREAM CHILDREN IN SPECIAL
EDUCATION, WHAT WE HAVE ALWAYS
CALLED SPECIAL ED.
GEORGIA SEEMS TO BE THE ONLY
STATE WITH THIS NETWORK OF WHAT
THEY CALL PSYCHOEDUCATIONAL
SCHOOLS THAT ARE SPECIFICALLY
DESIGNED FOR CHILDREN WITH
BEHAVIORAL PROBLEMS, PRIMARILY.
SO IT LOOKS LIKE WE'RE THE ONLY
STATE THAT STILL DOES THIS.
>> Woodruff: AS I UNDERSTAND
IT, THE STATE HAS NOT YET
RESPONDED.
THEY SAY THEY'RE STUDYING WHAT
THE JUSTICE DEPARTMENT CHARGES.
>> THAT'S RIGHT, THE GOVERNOR'S
OFFICE AND THE STATE DEPARTMENT
OF EDUCATION HAVE JUST SAID
DON'T GO LOOK AT IT.
>> Woodruff: WELL, IT'S A
DISTURBING PIECE OF REPORTING, A
DISTURBING REPORT FROM THE
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT.
ALAN JUDD, WE THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: DURING THE 1980S
AND '90s, THE U.S. NAVY BUILT A
FLEET OF NUCLEAR ARMED
SUBMARINES.
THEIR MISSION: DETER AN ATTACK
AGAINST THE UNITED STATES.
AND IF THAT FAILED, FIGHT A
NUCLEAR WAR.
THOSE SUBMARINES ARE NOW
APPROACHING THE END OF THEIR
LIFESPANS.
THE NAVY PLANS TO BUILD
REPLACEMENTS, BUT THERE'S
GROWING DEBATE OVER HOW MANY ARE
NEEDED AND HOW TO PAY FOR TM.HE
VETERAN PENTAGON REPORTER JAMIE
McINTYRE-- WHO IS NOW NATIONAL
SECURITY CORRESPONDENT FOR AL
JAZEERA AMERICA-- HAS BEEN ON
SPECIAL ASSIGNMENT FOR THE
NEWSHOUR.
HIS REPORT WAS PRODUCED IN
PARTNERSHIP WITH THE PULITZER
CENTER ON CRISIS REPORTING.
>> MAN BATTLE STATION MISSILE.
SPIN UP ALL MISSILES, SOUND THE
GENERAL ALARM, GENERAL ALARM,
>> Reporter: IF AMERICA'S
STRATEGY OF NUCLEAR DETERRENCE
EVER FAILS-- THE BEGINNING OF
THE END MIGHT LOOK SOMETHING
LIKE THIS.
>> AYE-AYE SIR.
>> Reporter: THE U.S. NAVY'S
BALLISTIC MISSILEUBMA SRINES ARE
ALL PART OF THE "OHIO CLASS,"
NAMED FOR THE FIRST SUBMARINE OF
THE DESIGN, THE "U.S.S. OHIO."
THEY HAVE ONLY ONE MISSION: TO
LURK SILENTLY, DEEP BENEATH THE
OCEAN, READY TO RAIN NUCLEAR
DEVASTATION ON VIRTUALLY ANY
TARGET, ANYWHERE, ANYTIME ON
ORDERS OF THE PRESIDENT.
SUBMERGED JUST OFF THE COAST OF
HAWAII, THE 180-MAN CREW OF THE
"U.S.S. PENNSYLVANIA"
DEMONSTRATED FOR THE PBS
NEWsHOUR AN ABRIDGED VERSION
WHAT IPRACT TICES EVERY WEEK THE
SUB'S AT SEA.
THE SUBMARINE'S VIDEO SCREENS
DISPLAYED ONLY UNCLASSIFIED
DATA, AND THE NAVY REVIEWED OUR
FOOTAGE TO ENSURE NOTHING WAS
COMPROMISED.
WHAT WE SAW WAS A MOCK DOOMSDAY
SCENARIO: THE LAUNCHING OF THREE
NUCLEAR-TIPPED MISSILES, ENOUGH
TO DESTROY SEVERAL MAJOR CITIES
AND LL MKIILLIONS OF PEOPLE.
IT'S A DRILL WHERE THERE CAN BE
NO QUESTIONING OF ORDERS, NO
CONSIDERATION OF CONSEQUENCES,
NO SECOND THOUGHTS.
LIEUTENANT A.J WALKER IS THE
"TRIGGERMAN" WHOSE JOB IS TO
WHAT'S EUPHEMISICALLY TERMED
"CLOSE THE CIRCUIT."
THIS IS THE MISSILE COMPARTMENT.
IT WHAT MAKES THIS SUBMARINE
SUCH A FEARSOME WEAPON.
24 MISSILE TUBES, EACH ONE
CAPABLE OF HOLDING A TRIDENT
MISSILE WITH MULTIPLE
INDEPENDENT TARGETED WARHEADS.
THAT MEANS THIS SINGLE SHIP
COULD DELIVER MASSIVE
DESTRUCTION TO MULTIP TARLEGETS
AROUND THE GLOBE.
TO CRITICS BACK IN WASHINGTON,
THAT RAISES AN OBVIOUS QUESTION:
IF ONE SUBMARINE CAN BRING ON
ARMAGEDDON, HOW MANY DOES THE
U.S. REALLY NEED?
JOSEPH CIRINCIONE IS PRESIDENT
OF THE PLOUGHSHARES FUND, A
FOUATIONDN THAT SUPPORTS
ELIMINATING NUCLEAR WEAPONS.
>> ONE SUBMARINE CARRIES AT ITS
MINIMUM THE EQUIVALENT OF 600
HIROSHIMA'S.
IF THEY LAUNCH THOSE MISSILES,
IF THEY LAUNCH THOSE WARHEADS,
IT WOULD BE A DESTRUCTIVE EVENT
BEYOND HISTORY.
>> Reporter: IT'S NOT JUST AN
ACADEMIC ARGUMENT.
THE MILITARY COMMANDER OF
AMERICA'S NUCLEAR ARSENAL,
ADMIRAL CECIL HANEY WANTS TO
UPGRADE THE AGING FLEET OF 14
OHIO-CLASS BALLISTIC MISSILE
SUBS IN THE COMING DECADES BY
BUILDING 12 NEW NEXT-GENERATION
SUBS.
>> REPLACING THE OHIO CLASS
SUBMARINE IS ONE OF MY TOP
PRIORITIES.
>> Reporter: EACH SUB HAS A
PRICE TAG OF UPWARDS OF $5
BILLION.
ALTHOUGH WHEN YOU COUNT RESEARCH
AND DEVELOPMENT THE TOTAL PRICE
CLIMBS TO OVER $100 BILLION,
ACCORDING TO THE CONGRESSIONAL
BUDGET OFFICE.
>> HOWEVER YOU WANT TO CALCULATE
IT, THIS FLEET IS A BARGAIN.
>> Reporter: VICE ADMIRAL MIKE
CONNOR COMMANDS THE NAVY
SUBMARINE FORCES.
AT HIS HEADQUARTERS, IN NORFOLK
VIRGINIA, HE MAKES THE CASE FOR
AN ALMOST ONE-FOR-ONE
REPLACEMENT OF THE CURRENT
FLEET, ARGUING THE COST IS JUST
ONE-PERCENT OF THE OVERALL
DEFENSE BUDGET, WHILE THE
BENEFIT IS INCALCULABLE,
MEASURED, HE SAYS, IN WARS THAT
NEVER START.
>> THE TRUTH IS THAT WE USE THEM
EVERY DAY TO DETER MAJOR POWER
WAR.
>> Reporter: THE BALLISTIC
MISSILE SUBMARINE IS AN AWESOME
WAR MACHINE.
AT 560 FEET, IT IS AS LONG AS
THE WASHINGTON MONUMENT IS HIGH
-- YET NEARLY INVISIBLE TO ENEMY
EYES WHEN SLINKING SILENTLY DEEP
BENEATH THE WAVES, WHICH MAKES
IT THE MOST SURVIVAL LEG OF
AMERICA'S NUCLEAR TRIAD OF SUBS,
BOMBERS, AND LAND BASED
MISSILES.
>> AND WHAT WOULD HAPPEN IF THEY
DID ATTEMPT A MASSIVE STRIKE, NO
MATTER HOW MASSIVE THAT STRIKE
WAS THE SUBMARINE FORCE AT SEA
WOULD SURVIVE, AND BE IN THE
POSITION TO RETALIATE.
>> Reporter: AS THE U.S. CUTS
THE NUMBER OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS IN
THE LATEST ROUND OF REDUCTIONS
NEGOTIATED WITH THE RUSSIANS,
SUBMARINES WILL PLAY AN OUTSIZED
ROLE IN THE DETERRENCE MISSION -
CARRYING 70% OF AMERICA'S ACTIVE
NUCLEAR ARSENAL.
STILL, CRITICS-- LIKE
PLOUGHSHARE'S JOE CIRINCIONE--
ARGUE BUILDING ENOUGH NEW SUBS
TO DESTROY THE WORLD A DOZEN
TIMES OVER IS EXPENSIVE
OVERKILL.
>> IF YOU JUST NEED THIS TO BE A
DETERRENT FORCE TO RESPOND, IN
CASE SOMEONE IS CRAZY ENOUGH TO
ACTUALLY ATTACK THE UNITED
STATES AND THEREFORE DETER THEM
FROM DOING THAT.
WELL, YOU REALLY COULD BE
TALKING ABOUT FOUR, FIVE, SIX
NUCLEAR SUBMARINES EACH OF WHICH
WOULD HAVE 16 MISSILE TUBES,
EACH OF WHICH WOULD CARRY FIVE
TO SIX WARHEADS-- THAT'S A LOT
OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS.
>> Reporter: BUT AS ADMIRAL
CONNOR WAR-GAMES VARIOUS WORST-
CASE SCENARIOS, INVOLVING,
RUSSIA, CHINA, NORTH KOREA, HE
INSISTS THE PSYCHOLOGICAL
CALCULUS OF DETERRENCE CAN'T BE
REDUCED TO A SIMPLE MATH
PROBLEM.
>> SO YOU THINK ABOUT AN
INTELLIGENT ADVERSARY, AND OUR
ADVERSARIES-- PEER COMPETITOR
SITUATION-- ARE INTELLIGENT,
THINKING ADVERSARIES, YOU
WOULDN'T WANT TO HAVE A
SITUATION WHERE THERE IS AN
INCENTIVE WHERE THEY SAY, "YOU
KNOW, IF WE STRIKE ON THIS DAY
OR WHEN THIS SHIP IS BEING
REPAIRED OR BEING LEAVING PORT
OR COMING IN, A BALANCE OR FORCE
MIGHT CHANGE IN OUR FAVOR."
>> Reporter: BUT ULTIMATELY IT
COULD BE MONEY NOT STRATEGY THAT
TORPEDOES THE NAVY'S PCEY RIPLAN
TO DESIGN AND BUILD A STATE-OF-
THE-ART SUB TO REPLACE 12 OF THE
CURRENT.
>> THE COSTS OF THE PROGRAM HAS
BEEN ESTIMATED IN THE RANGE OF
$100 BILLION, AND THE NAVY SAID
IT CANNOT PAY FOR IT OUT OF ITS
NAVY BUDGET.
>> Reporter: AT HIS SENATE
HEARING TO BE CONFIRMED AS JOINT
CHIEFS CHAIRMAN, GENERAL JOSEPH
DUNFORD AGREED, PAYING FOR A
WHOLE NEW FLEET OF SUBS OUT OF
THE REGULAR SHIPBUILDING ACCOUNT
WOULD BUST THE NAVY'S BUDGET.
>> WHAT I CAN TELL YOU WITH THE
DEGREE OF SURETY IS THAT, WERE
WE TO FUND THE OHIO CLASS
REPLACEMENT OUT OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF THE NAVY, IT WOULD
HAVE A ADVERSE PLAN ON THE SHIP
BUILDING PLAN AND THE ESTIMATES
ARE BETWEEN TWO AND A HALF AND
THREE SHIPS A YEAR.
>> THE COST IS SOME PEOPLE WILL
SAY IS OUTRAGEOUS, I JUST SAY
IT'S TREMENDOUS.
>> Reporter: NAVAL HISTORIAN AND
CONSULTANT NORMAN POLMAR SAYS
EITHER WAY YOU FUND THE PLAN,
THROUGH THE NORMAL BUDGET, OR A
SPECIAL ACCOUNT IT'S
UNAFFORDABLE, AND UNWORKABLE.
>> IF CONGRESS WERE TO FUND THE
NAVY STRATEGIC SUBMARINES OUT OF
A SEPARATE FUND, TOMORROW
AFTERNOON THE AIR FORCE WOULD
COME IN AND SAY, "HEY, CONGRESS
HAS APPROVED A NEW BOMBER, WE
WANT THAT FUNDED OUT OF A
SEPARATE STRATEGIC FUND.
>> Reporter: POLMAR SAYS THERE
RE SAMARTER, CHEAPER WAYS TO BUY
THE SAME LEVEL OF NUCLEAR
DETERRENCE, MODIFYING SMALLER
ATTACK SUBMARINES ALREADY IN
SERVICE, WHICH HE ARGUES WOULD
ALLOW THE NAVY TO BUY FEWER OF
THE BIGGER BALLISTIC MISSILE
SUBS.
>> TODAY, EVERY ATTACK SUBMARINE
CAN CARRY TOMAHAWK LAND ATTACK
CONVENTIONAL MISSILES.
MOST OF OUR SUBMARINES HAVE
VERTICAL LAUNCH TOOLS FOR 12 OF
THESE TOMAHAWK MISSILES.
THOSE MISSILES TOMORROW OR IN A
COUPLE OF YEARS, COULD HAVE
NUCLEAR WARHEADS.
>> Reporter: BUT THE NAVY
COUNTERS THE SMALLER ATTACK SUBS
DON'T HAVE THE ENDURANCE OF THE
BIGGER "BOOMERS," AND THAT THEIR
CRUISE MISSILES DON'T HAVE THE
INTERCONTINENTAL RANGE OR CARRY
MULTIPLE WARHEADS THAT CAN
DESTROY DIFFERENT TARGETS.
AND ADVOCATES FOR FAR DEEPER
WEAPONS CUTS, SAY THE WHOLE
DEBATE UNDERSCORES THE FOLLY OF
EXPENSIVE NEW NUCLEAR WEAPONS
THAT WOULD ONLY BE USED IF A WAR
WERE ESSENTIALLY ALREADY LOST.
THIS PLAQUE SHOWS THE "U.S.S.
PENNSYLVANIA" WAS LAUNCHED IN
APRIL OF 1988.
THAT MAKES IT OVER A QUARTER OF
A CENTURY OLD.
IT-- LIKE OTHER SUBMARINES OF
ITS CLASS-- WAS DESIGNED FOR 30
YEARS OF SERVICE, WHICH MEANS IT
WOULD HAVE BEEN DECOMMISSIONED
IN THE NEXT COUPLE OF YEARS.
BUT NOW THE NAVY SAYS IT'S
FIGURED OUT HOW TO KEEP THOSE
SUBMARINES RUNNING FOR AN EXTRA
12 YEARS.
COMMANDER JOHN CAGE IS CAPTAIN
OF THE "U.S.S. PENNSYLVANIA."
SO YOU'VE SHOWED US AROUND YOUR
BOAT, IT LOOKS GREAT, EVERYTHING
LOOKS LIKE IT'S SPIT-POLISHED.
IT LOOKS LIKE THIS BOAT COULD GO
ON FOREVER.
>> SHE STILL HAS A LOT OF LIFE
LEFT IN HER.
BUT IT'S DEFINITELY GETTING ON
IN THE YEARS.
THERE'S THINGS THAT, WE HAVE A
LOT OF REDUNDANT SYSTEMS THAT I
FIND MYSELF USING THOSE
REDUNDANT SYSTEMS A LITTLE BIT
MORE.
CERTAIN COMPONENTS WILL FAIL.
CERTAIN THINGS ARE JUST
BEGINNING TO RUN INTO THEIR
LIFE, PAST THEIR LIFETIME.
>> Reporter: BUT THE SUB'S CREW
IS STILL PREPARED TO MAKE THE
UNTHINKABLE REALITY.
>> WE DO THINK ABOUT IT.
IT'S DEFINITELY SOMETHING WE
DON'T WANT TO HAPPEN.
NOBODY IN THE BOAT WANTS IT TO
HAPPEN.
>> Reporter: HOW WOULD YOU
HANDLE THE CREW ON THE BOAT
AFTER YOU LAUNCH LIKE THAT?
WHEN NO ONE WOULD KNOW WHAT THE
FATE OF THE WORLD IS?
HOW DO YOU KEEP THE CREW
TOGETHER?
>> I'LL TELL YOU THAT WOULD BE
DIFFICULT.
ONE OF THE REASONS WHY WE TRAIN
SO FREQUENTLY, THE EVOLUTION
THAT YOU SAW WE DO TIME AND TIME
AGAIN.
SO IT BECOMES SOMETHING WE CAN
EXECUTE IMMEDIATELY AND QUICKLY.
BUT AFTER THAT IT WOULD BE A
VERY DIFFICULT TIME.
>> Reporter: A SUCCESSFUL
DEPLOYMENT IS ONE WHERE THE ONLY
PROJECTILES FROM THE SEA, ARE
THE BOTTLENOSE DOLPHINS WHO
PLAYFULLY SURF THE SUB'S BOW AS
IT PREPARES TO DIVE.
JAMIE McINTYRE, FOR THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, ABOARD THE "U.S.S.
PENNSYLVANIA," OFF THE COAST OF
HAWAII.
>> Woodruff: ONLINE WE HAVE A
LOT MORE ABOUT NUCLEAR ARMED
SUBMARINES.
YOU CAN WATCH EXTENDED EXCERPTS
OF THE INTERVIEWS WE FEATURED,
AND SEE HOW SUBMARINES GET RE-
SUPPLIED AT SEA.
ALL THAT IS ON OUR WEB SITE,
pbs.org/newshour.
FROM THE POLICE SHOOTING IN
CINCINNATI, TO RISING
EXPECTATIONS FOR THE FIRST
REPUBLICAN PRESIDENTIAL DEBATE,
IT'S BEEN A FULL WEEK.
AND IT LEADS US TO THE ANALYSIS
OF SHIELDS AND BROOKS.
THAT'S SYNDICATED COLUMNIST MARK
SHIELDS AND "NEW YORK TIMES"
COLUMNIST DAVID BROOKS.
GENTLEMEN, WELCOME.
, SO MARK, THIS SHOOTING IN
CINCINNATI OF A BLACK MAN BY A
WHITE POLICEMAN, THE VIDEO
RELEASED THIS WEEK, THERE
APPEARS TO BE NO QUESTION ABOUT
WHAT HAPPENED.
WHY DO THESE THINGS KEEP
HAPPENING?
>> I WISH I KNEW, JUDY.
I MEAN, I DO -- I'VE NEVER HEARD
A PSSRE ATTORNEY JUST COME RIGHT
OUT AND SAY THIS WAS ESSENTIALLY
MURDER, BUT I HAVE TO SAY I AM
ENCOURAGED BY THE USE OF BODY
CAMERAS.
THIS IS WHERE IT'S BEEN TRIED,
USED, ENDORSED BY THE NATIONAL
ASSOCIATION OF CHIEFS OF POLICE
AND LED TO THE DIMINUTION OF
VIOLENCE.
WE KNOW CHARACTER IS HOW WE
CONDUCT OURSELVES WHEN NO ONE IS
LOOKING.
THIS IS AN INCENTIVE TO
CHARACTER.
THE BOGUS CHARGE AGAINST A
POLICE OFFICER IS DISCREDITED
BECAUSE OF THE PRESENCE OF THESE
CAMERAS.
BUT TO ANSWER YOUR QUESTION, I
DO NOT HAVE AN ANSWER.
>> Woodruff: DAVID, REREPORTED
EARLIER THE CITY OF BALTIMORE
HAS HAD A RECORD NUMBER OF
HOMICIDES, GUN DEATHS JUST IN
THE LAST MONTH, YET THESE
INCIDENTS CONTINUE.
>> YEAH, WELL, YOU KNOW, I
SUSPECT MY THEORY WOULD BE THESE
THINGS HAVE ALL BEEN HAPPENING
AND WE JUST HAVEN'T KNOWN OR
TALKED ABOUT IT AND WITHOUT THE
COP CAM IN THIS CASE WE PROBABLY
WOULDN'T KNOW ABOUT IT AT ALL,
IT WOULD JUST BE AN INVISIBLE
CASE FOR US.
I'M AMBIVALENT ABOUT COP CAMS, A
LOT OF WHAT POLICE DO ARE GOING
INTO HOMES AT PEOPLE'S MOST
VULNERABLE MOMENTS AND HOW ALSO
HOW THE CAMERA CAN INTERFERE
WITH THE RELATIONSHIP AND THE
TRUST OF THE POLICE OFFICER.
IN THIS CASE, IT'S VERY CLEAR.
I THINK THIS IS THE CASE WHERE
FINALLY WE HAVE THE TECHNOLOGY
THAT GIVES US THE INFORMATION.
AS TO WHY THE MURDER RATE IS
RISING, MY READING ON THE
RESEARCH IS FIRST THERE'S A LOT
OF GANG ACTIVITY AND A LOT OF IT
IS EXTREMELY LOCALIZED.
BUT WE'VE SEEN ALL THE CASES OF
POLICE ABUSE.
BUT THE POLICE ARE THERE FOR A
REASON AND THEY GENERALLY DO
GOOD AND PREVENT CRIME.
IF THE POLICE ARE BEING A LITTLE
LESS AGGRESSIVE SOMETIMES FOR
GOOD REASON, IT'S NOT TOTALLY
SURPRISING YOU'RE GOING TO SEE A
AN UPTICK IN CRIME.
>> Woodruff: MARK.
I THINK, JUDY, CAMERAS,
THEY'RE NOT A PANACEA BUT I
THINK THEY WILL HELP RESTORE THE
RELATIONSHIP AND TRUST IN THE
POLICE.
I THINK THEY'RE GOOD FOR THE
POLICE, QUITE HONESTLY.
AND THERE'S NO QUESTION THAT
THERE'S BEEN A BREECH IN THE
TRUST BETWEEN ESPECIALLY URBAN
COMMUNITY, AFRICAN-AMERICAN
MINORITY COMMUNITIES AND THE
POLICE IN MAINLY AMERICAN
CITIES.
>> A TOUGH THING TO WATCH THIS
WEEK.
LET'S TURN TO PRESIDENTIAL
POLITICS.
DAVID, WE ARE SIX DAYS AWAY NOW
FROM THE FIRST DEBATE.
THE REPUBLICANS ARE GOING TO
MEET IN CLEVELAND.
I GUESS TEN OF THE NOW 17
REPUBLICANS, FORMER VIRGINIA
GOVERNOR JIM GILMORE JUMPED IN
THE RACE TODAY.
WHAT DO WE CONNECT?
THIS IS THE FIRST TIME WE SEE
TEN OF THE 17 TOGETHER.
>> WELL, FIRST, WHAT'S TRUMP?
IS THIS A DONALD TRUMP REALITY
SHOW WITH NINE SUPPORTING
ACTORS?
THAT'S GOING TO BE THE BIG
STORY, WHETHER HE IS ABLE TO
DOMINATE WITH HIS OWN VOICE,
WHETHER EVERYONE, AS THEY HAVE
BEEN DOING OFF CAMERA IN THE
LAST WEEK, TRYING TO GET
PUBLICITY FOR THEMSELVES BY
ATTACKING HIM, WHETHER HE
BECOMES A CENTRAL FIGURE OR
WHETHER THEY TRY TO IGNORE HIM.
>> Woodruff: HOPE THEY TRY TO
IGNORE HIM AND LET THE THING
RIDE ITSELF OUT.
BUT HE REMAINS PERVERSELY THE
BIG ISSUE HERE.
>> Woodruff: WHAT DO YOU
EXPECT?
>> HERE'S WHAT'S GOING TO
HAPPEN --
(LAUGHTER)
WELL, I GO BACK TO THE
DEMOCRATIC RACE IN 2004 WHEN
HOWARD DEAN WAS THE FRONTRUNNER
AND HIS DEBATE, GEPHARDT, THE
DEMOCRATIC CHALLENGER WHO WON
IOWAL IN 1988, TOOK HIM ON
DIRECTLY AND SAID HE WASN'T A
REAL DEMOCRAT.
THE PROBLEM IS, WHEN YOU'VE GOT
A MULTI-CANDIDATE FIELD, AND YOU
HAVE 17, THIS TIME YOU WILL HAVE
10 ON THE STAGE, WHEN A GOES
AFTER B IN A TWO-PERSON RACE,
THEN EITHER A PAYS A PRICE FOR
THE CHARGE IF IT'S TRUE, B
BENEFITS FROM THE CHARGE IF IT
EXPOSE'S A SHORTCOMING.
BUT WHEN A IS LEFT TO B AND
THERE'S A C, D AND Q LINED UP,
YOU HAVE NO IDEA WHO'S GOING TO
BE THE BENEFICIARY.
I DON'T THINK THERE'S ANY
QUESTION THERE WILL BE AN EFFORT
TO GO AFTER DONALD TRUMP.
>> Woodruff: ISN'T THAT JUST
GOING TO MAKE HIM --
>> NO, YOU HAVE TO DO IT.
YOU HAVE TO BRING HIM DOWN TO
EARTH.
THIS IS A MAN WHO IS PRO-CHOICE.
NOW HE'S PRO-LIFE.
HE'S FOR SINGLE-PAYER HEALTH
INSURANCE.
HE'S ADD ODDS PHILOSOPHICALLY TO
HIS CAREER, HIS SUPPORT OF
DEMOCRATIC CANDIDATES, LARGE
CHECKS FOR HILLARY CLINTON'S
CAMPAIGNS IN THE PAST.
THEY EXPLAINED NOW IT WAS ALL
TRANSACTIONAL.
YOU WANT TO BRING HIM DOWN IF
YOU'RE HIS OPPONENT AND CHARGING
HIM, I THINK CHRIS CHRISTIE WILL
GO AFTER HIM MOST DIRECTLY
BECAUSE HE HAD ALREADY PLAYED
FOR HIMSELF THE ROLE OF NO
NONSENSE TELL IT LIKE IT IS
STRAIGHT FROM THE SHOULDER AND
DONALD TRUMP HAS TOTALLY
PREEMPTED THAT.
BUT, NO, I THINK IT'S GOING TO
BE FASCINATING.
JUDY, DEBATES ARE IMPORTANT EVEN
THIS EARLY.
>> Woodruff: DONALD TRUMP HAS
BENEFITED, IT SEEMS TO ME,
SOMEHOW, FROM THE ATTACKS.
HE'S GOTTEN BIGGER AND STRONGER.
>> I AGREE.
I THINK THE NORMAL LOGIC DOES
NOT APPLY TO DONALD TRUMP.
I THINK IF YOU GO AFTER HIM AS
HE'S GONE AFTER ALL THESE
REPUBLICANS AND THESE
REPUBLICANS HAVE GONE AFTER HIM,
IT ILLUSTRATES THERE ARE NINE OR
16-OF THEM AND ONE OF HIM AND HE
STAND OUT.
COUPLE OF THINGS ARE HAPPENING,
ONE, PEOPLE ALWAYS LIKE A MIDDLE
AGED OBNOXIOUS GUY.
I BUILT MY WHOLE CAREER ON THAT.
(LAUGHTER)
SECOND, HE'S NOT LIKE THE REST
OF THEM.
SOMEBODY DID A GOOD SPEECH
ANALYSIS OF THE OPENING SPEECHES
ALL THE CANDIDATES GAVE AND ALL
THE CANDIDATES HAD SPEECHES
USING THE SAME LANGUAGE,
CLUSTERS OF WORDS, THEY'RE ALL
VERY SIMILAR EXCEPT DONALD
TRUMP.
DIFFERENT VERBAL STYLE,
ARGUMENTS AND WORD AND HE JUST
STANDS OUT.
AS MARK POINTED OUT ON THIS SHOW
A LOT, IF YOU HAVE TWO OR THREE
DECADES OF POLITICIANS ATTACKING
WASHINGTON AND HE IS THE
ULTIMATE ANTI-WASHINGTON
CANDIDATE AND THEY'RE ALL SORT
OF WASHINGTON THEN ATTACKING HIM
WILL MAKE HIM LOOK EXCEPTIONAL
AND PROBABLY HELP HIM IN THE
SHORT TERM.
>> Woodruff: IF DONALD TRUMP
IS GETTING BIGGER ON THE
REPUBLICAN SIDE, BERNIE SANDERS
CONTINUES TO DRAW BIG CROWDS ON
THE DEMOCRATIC SIDE.
THERE'S SOME QUESTION ABOUT
WHETHER HE'S TAKING FANS AWAY OR
VOTES AWAY FROM HILLARY CLINTON
THIS EARLY, BUT HOW DO YOU
EXPLAIN THIS APPEAL OF THESE TWO
OUTSPOKEN PEOPLE WITH VERY
DIFFERENT VIEWS, BERNIE SANDERS
AND DONALD TRUMP, WHAT IS OUT
THERE GOING ON?
I SAW A QUOTE TODAY FROM THE
DEMOCRATIC POLLSTER PETER HART
WHERE HE SAID A LOT OF PEOPLE
ARE SCARED AND THEY WANT
SOMEBODY TO PROTECT THEM.
>> I HAVE GREAT RESPECT FOR
PETER AND THAT MAY VERY WELL
EXPLAIN PART OF THE APPEAL.
BUT TO ME THE APPEAL THAT THEY
HAVE IN COMMON IS THAT THEY ARE
ESSENTIALLY, AS DAVID PUT IT,
OUT OF THE MOLD.
DONALD TRUMP IS NOT THE TYPICAL
CANDIDATE PEOPLE HAVE COME TO
EXPECT.
HE'S NOT TAILORING HIS LANGUAGE
TO THE MOMENT.
BERNIE SANDERS, WHAT YOU SEE IS
WHAT YOU GET.
I MEAN, THERE ARE A LOT OF
DEMOCRATS WHO ARE STILL, AT
HEART, DISAPPOINTED THAT THE
PEOPLE THAT THEY FELT BROUGHT
THE NATION TO ITS KNEES IN 2008,
2009 -- WREAT WALL STREET, THE P
1% -- HAVE SKATED, NEVER BEEN
HELD ACCOUNTABLE, NEVER GONE TO
THE BAR OF JUSTICE, NOBODY'S
PAID A PRICE.
BERNIE SANDERS IS THE AVENGING
ANGEL.
HE'S THE ANTI-CANDIDATE, IN THIS
CASE, JUDY.
NO FOCUS GROUPS, HE SPENT NO
MONEY ON POLLING, NO PRE-TESTED
REMARKS, HE JUST SAYS EXACTLY
WHAT HE'S BEEN SAYING.
THE CROWDS ARE TRULY EXPRESSIVE.
>> Woodruff: DOES THAT EXPLAIN
BERNIE SANDERS, DAVID?
>> YEAH, I THINK SO.
I MEAN, IT'S NOT WHAT YOU
BELIEVE SOMETIMES, IT'S HOW YOU
BELIEVE IT.
DONALD TRUMP AND BERNIE SANDERS
HAVE VERY DIFFERENT BELIEF
STYLES.
I'M NOT SURE DONALD TRUMP
BELIEVES IN ANYTHING EXCEPT HIS
BELIEF SYSTEM BEGINS AND ENDS
WITH THE MORNING MIRROR.
BUT SANDERS ACTUALLY BELIEVES IN
THIS AND HE'S INTELLECTUALLY
CONSISTENT AND RIGOROUS.
I DON'T AGREE WITH IT BUT IT IS
A COHERENT BELIEF SYSTEM AND, TO
ME, HIS SUCCESS IS EXPLAINED BY
THE RAPID AND ALMOST
DAM-BREAKING MOVEMENT,
INTELLECTUAL MOVEMENT BASED
FURTHER TO THE LEFT.
SO WHAT HAS BEEN AN ANCHOR OF
DEMOCRATIC CENTRISM, THAT ANCHOR
IS GONE.
PEOPLE ARE RESPONDING TO TISSUES
OF THE DAY, INEQUALITY,
STAGNATION, AND THEY ARE MOVING
FORWARD QUICKLY AND THAT'S WHERE
BERNIE SANDERS IS.
FOR HILLARY CLINTON IT'S CATCH
UP, FOR HIM HOME BASE.
>> Woodruff: YOU'RE RIGHT, WE
ARE HEARING SOME OF THAT FROM
HILLARY CLINTON.
I WANT TO ASK YOU ABOUT THE
SUPER PAC WE'RE SUPPOSED TO BE
HEARING TONIGHT, THE FILING
FUNDRAISING REPORTS ON THE
SUPER PAC.
IN THE PAST, MONEY HAS NOT
ALWAYS BEEN DETERMINATIVE JUST
BECAUSE SOMEBODY RAISED OR HAD A
LOT OF MONEY DIDN'T ALWAYS MEAN
THEY WERE GOING TO DO WELL.
COULDN'T THAT CHANGE THIS TIME
BECAUSE SOME OF THE SUPER PAC
MONEY IS JUST OFF THE CHARTS,
HUNDREDS OF MILLIONS.
>> PRESIDENT JOHN CONNALLY AND
PRESIDENT PHIL GRAMM WOULD AGREE
MONEY NEVER DELIVERED THE WHITE
HOUSE TO EITHER ONE OF THEM,
EVEN THOUGH THEY WERE BOTH GREAT
FUNDRAISERS.
IN THE PAST, IN ORDER TO
CONTINUE AS A SERIOUS CANDIDATE,
YOU HAD TO BE IN THE TOP THREE
FINISHES IN IOWA, YOU HAD TO BE
IN THE TOP TWO OUT OF
NEW HAMPSHIRE.
ALL OUR PRESIDENTS ELECTED IN
THE PAST HALF CENTURY FINISHED
EITHER FIRST OR SECOND IN
NEW HAMPSHIRE AND IN THE TOP
THREE IN IOWA.
THAT CHANGED WITH THE CITIZENS
UNITED WHEN WE GAVE UNLIMITED
AMOUNTS OF MONEY.
NEWT GINGRICH FINISHED A BAD
FOURTH IN IOWA IN 2012, A WEAKER
FOURTH IN NEW HAMPSHIRE, BUT
SHELDON AIDLESON WROTE A
$50 MILLION CHECK AND COULD GO
TO IOWA AND SALVAGE MITT ROMNEY,
WHICH HE DID.
NOW WE HAVE 30 PEOPLE SO FAR AN
HOUR BEFORE THE SHOW WHO GAVE A
MILLION DOLLARS TO A PA C, 70%
GAVE IT TO JEB BUSH.
>> Woodruff: WILL MONEY MAKE A
DISMRCHES.
>> IF CANDIDATES ARE SUPER POOR,
THEY WON'T BE ABLE TO RUN A
CAMPAIGN AFTER A WHILE AND WILL
DROP OUT.
SO IT HELPS YOU STAY IN THE RACE
LIKE NEWT GINGRICH DID.
BUT ONCE YOU'RE IN THE RACE AND
IN THE MAJOR LEAGUES, I DON'T
THINK IT MATTERS BECAUSE THERE
WILL BE SO MUCH SWAMPING OF
MONEY YOU'RE JUST MAKING THE
RUBBER BOURNS AND I DON'T THINK
IT WILL GIVE YOU A HUGE
ADVANTAGE OVER THE OTHER
CANDIDATES BECAUSE EVERYBODY
WILL HAVE PLENTY OF IT AND WE
WILL BE BOMBARDED WITH ADS AND
THEY WILL CEASE TO MAKE A
DIFFERENCE.
SO IT GETS TO THE CANDIDATE,
WHAT THEY'RE SAYING AND HOW
DISTINCT THEY ARE.
>> Woodruff: NEXT TIME WE GET
TOGETHER WE'LL BE TALKING ABOUT
THE FIRST REPUBLICAN DEBATE.
DAVID BROOKS, MARK SHIELDS, WE
THANK YOU.
NOW TO POLITICAL COMMENTARY
STILL STEEPED IN INTELLECT, BUT
FAR LESS CIVIL THAN SHIELDS AND
BROOKS.
JEFFREY BROWN HAS THE STORY.
>> Brown: HARD TO IMAGINE NOW: A
TIME BEFORE POLITICAL PUNDITS
DOMINATED CABLE AND BROADCAST
NEWS PROGRAMS.
THE DOCUMENTARY "BEST OF
ENEMIES" PINPOINTS A KEY MOMENT
OF CHANGE.
WHEN TWO INTELLECTUAL GIANTS--
WILLIAM F. BUCKLEY ON THE RIGHT,
GORE VIDAL ON THE LEFT--
ATTRACTED A HUGE NATIONAL
AUDIENCE WITH INTELLIGENCE AND
WIT, BUT ALSO PUT-DOWNS AND
INSULTS.
FILMMAKERS MORGAN NEVILLE AND
ROBERT GORDON EXPLORED A SERIES
OF DEBATES THE TWO HELD DURING
THE 1968 POLITICAL CONVENTIONS
THAT FOR A VARIETY OF REASONS,
WOULD ALTER THE FUTURE OF
POLITICAL DISCOURSE ON
TELEVISION.
WE SPOKE RECENTLY AT THE A.F.I.
DOCS FESTIVAL IN WASHINGTON.
YOU SET THIS UP AS BOTH A
PERSONAL AND A KIND OF NATIONAL
EPIC.
WHY DO YOU THINK IT ROSE TO THAT
LEVEL?
>> GORE VIDAL AND WILLIAM
BUCKLEY REPRESENTED THE POLAR
OPPOSITES-- THE LEFT AND THE
RIGHT-- AT A TIME WHEN AMERICA
WAS KINDA COMING APART AT THE
SEAMS A LITTLE BIT.
THIS IS 1968.
THERE'S RIOTING IN THE STREETS
AND THEY'RE REPRESENTING THOSE
POLES THERE ON NATIONAL TV, BUT
WHAT I THINK WHAT MAKES IT SUCH
A DRAMATIC STORY FOR US IS THAT
IT WAS DEEPLY PERSONAL, IT WAS
UNDER THE VENEER OF POLITICS,
BUT I THINK THEY SAW IN THE
OTHER PERSON SOMEBODY WHO COULD
DETECT THEIR OWN INSECURITIES
AND EXPOSE THOSE TO THE WORLD.
>> Brown: YOU PRESENTED, I MEAN,
YOU FOLLOWED TEN DEBATES, RIGHT?
IT'S LIKE A HEAVYWEIGHT, A
HEAVYWEIGHT FIGHT, RIGHT?
YOU EVEN HAVE THE ROUND ONE,
ROUND TWO, DEBATE ONE, TWO,
THREE.
WHAT HAPPENED, WHAT DID YOU SEE
HAPPENING OVER THE COURSE OF THE
FIGHT, SO TO SPEAK?
>> IT WAS AN EVER-GROWING
ATTACK.
WE SAW IN THE RAW FOOTAGE WITHIN
TWO MINUTES OF THE FIRST DEBATE,
THESE HIGH-MINDED GUYS TAKE THE
LOW ROAD.
IT BECOMES VERY PERSONAL.
>> Brown: RIGHT AWAY.
>> RIGHT AWAY.
>> Brown: YOU SAW THAT.
>> THIS BIG BLOW-UP WAS
INEVITABLE, ALTHOUGH IT'S A SLOW
FUSE.
AND YOU DON'T GET THAT NOW.
YOU DON'T GET THAT KIND OF TIME
ON TV NOW TO HAVE A SLOW BURN
LIKE THAT.
NOW IT'S LIKE, "WE'RE BACK, AND
HERE'S THE FIREWORKS!"
>> Brown: OVER THE COURSE OF TEN
DEBATES, THAT SLOW BURN MORPHED
INTO A BITTER RIVALRY THAT WAS
BROADCAST TO MILLIONS.
>> THERE WERE SO MANY NUGGETS WE
FOUND AND ONE OF MY FAVORITE
THINGS WAS GOING THROUGH GORE'S
PAPERS OF HARVARD AND FINDING
THAT THE PAPERS HE HAD ON HIS
LAP WITH HIM DURING THE DEBATES,
WHICH INCLUDED PAGES OF SCRIPTED
INSULTS THAT HE...
>> Brown: REALLY, SCRIPTED
INSULTS.
SO, HE CAME TO PLAY, SO TO
SPEAK.
>> HE WAS THERE WITH A GAME PLAN
AND THAT WAS THE EVIDENCE RIGHT
THERE.
>> Brown: AND OF COURSE IT DOES
LEAD UP TO THIS CULMINATING,
MOST FAMOUS MOMENT WHERE HE DOES
GET UNDER BUCKLEY'S SKIN.
HE CALLS HIM A "CRYPTO NAZI."
BUCKLEY COMES BACK AT HIM WITH,
CALLING HIM A QUEER AND
THREATENS TO PUNCH HIM IN THE
MOUTH.
>> IT WAS ONE OF THOSE DEFINING
MOMENTS IN TELEVISION.
OF COURSE THERE WERE RIOTING ON
THE STREETS AND PEOPLE ARE
PAYING ATTENTION TO THAT, BUT
MOST OF AMERICA IS TAKING THIS
IN ON TELEVISION.
THE TELEVISION AUDIENCE THAT
NIGHT WAS HUGE AND THIS IS
BEFORE YOUTUBE, BEFORE PEOPLE
COULD GO BACK AND ANALYZE IT.
IT HAPPENED AND THEN IT
VANISHED.
>> Brown: LET ME JUST ASK YOU
ONE MORE QUESTION ABOUT THE
PERSONAL DRAMA OF THE TWO MEN
BECAUSE YOU'RE MAKING THE CASE
THAT TELEVISION NEWS, TELEVISION
POLITICAL DISCOURSE WERE NEVER
THE SAME, THE TWO MEN WERE
ACTUALLY NEVER THE SAME.
THEY NEVER QUITE GOT OVER THIS.
>> IT WAS SOMETHING, I THINK,
THEY WERE REGULARLY ASKED ABOUT
FOR THE REST OF THEIR LIVES.
IT WAS SOMETHING THAT NOT ONLY
DID THEY HAVE THIS BLOW-UP ON
TELEVISION, THEY WROTE LONG
PIECES IN "ESQUIRE" MAGAZINE THE
NEXT YEAR, DEBATING, RE-DEBATING
THIS.
THEN THEY SUED EACH OTHER OVER
THOSE PIECES FOR THREE YEARS.
>> Brown: WHY DO YOU THINK THEY
COULDN'T LET IT GO PERSONALLY?
>> I THINK BUCKLEY WAS THE ONE
WHO COULDN'T LET IT GO.
I THINK GORE WOULD HAVE JUST
BRAGGED ABOUT IT AT DINNER
PARTIES THE REST OF HIS LIFE AND
THAT WOULD HAVE BEEN IT.
I THINK BUCKLEY REALLY FELT LIKE
HE HAD TO ANSWER TO HIMSELF FOR
SOMETHING THAT HAD HAPPENED
AND I THINK FOR BUCKLEY IT WAS
TRYING TO EXPLAIN WHY HE LOST
HIS COOL, WHEN HE WAS THE KING
OF NOT LOSING HIS COOL.
>> SO IT WAS
UNCHARACTERISTICALLY LOSING HIS
COOL BECAUSE THAT'S WHAT IT WAS.
IT WAS UNLIKE ANY OTHER MOMENT
IN HIS CAREER.
AND I THINK THAT BY SHOWING THAT
HE COULDN'T LET IT GO, GORE
REALIZED THAT HE COULD CONTINUE
TO ENJOY THAT MOMENT OF VICTORY
BY BRINGING IT UP AT EVERY
OPPORTUNITY HE WAS GIVEN.
>> Brown: THE SPARK BETWEEN THE
TWO HEAVYWEIGHTS WAS A HIT WITH
TELEVISION AUDIENCES AND A BOON
FOR ABC, THEN A RELATIVELY NEW
NETWORK DESPERATE TO STAND OUT
FROM ITS COMPETITORS.
SENSING A GOOD THING, EXECUTIVES
THERE DECIDED THAT INSTEAD OF
COVERING THE CONVENTIONS IN
FULL, THEY COULD PUNCTUATE THE
COVERAGE WITH VIDAL AND
BUCKLEY'S POLITICAL-- AND
SOMETIMES PERSONAL-- COMMENTARY.
>> ABC COULDN'T AFFORD TO DO
GAVEL-TO-GAVEL COVERAGE AT THE
CONVENTIONS AS NETWORKS HAD
TRADITIONALLY HAD DONE.
AND SO THEY CAME UP WITH WHAT
THEY CALLED "UNCONVENTIONAL
CONVENTION COVERAGE," WHICH WAS
A KINDA DISTILLATION OF THE
CONVENTIONS NEWS WITH THESE
COMMENTARY SEGMENTS EVERY NIGHT,
THESE DEBATES BETWEEN VIDAL AND
BUCKLEY.
>> ...RIDICULED BY OTHER
NETWORKS.
>> AND IN THE AFTERMATH OF THIS,
EVEN WITH THE BIG BLOW-UP
BETWEEN VIDAL AND BUCKLEY AND
THE RATINGS THEY GOT, NO NETWORK
EVER AGAIN DID GAVEL-TO-GAVEL
COVERAGE AGAIN, SO IT REALLY DID
ESTABLISH A NEW TEMPLATE AND
>> THESE GUYS BROUGHT A COMMAND
OF HISTORY, OF LANGUAGE, OF
POLITICS, ALL THESE THINGS TO
BEAR ON THIS CONVERSATION AND IT
PRODUCED THIS MASSIVE FOREST
FIRE.
IT JUST WANTS THE FLASH PAPER
FIRE, IT JUST WANTS THE FLAME.
IT DOESN'T CARE ABOUT WHAT'S
BURNING.
>> Brown: AND YOU'RE SAYING
WE'RE STILL VINGLI WITH THAT
TODAY.
>> Brown: THE FILM "BEST OF
ENEMIES" CAN BE SEEN IN THEATERS
NATIONWIDE JULY 31.
FOR THE PBS NEWSHOUR, I'M
JEFFREY BROWN.
>> Woodruff: ON THE NEWSHOUR
AND A REMINDER ABOUT
SOME UPCOMING PROGRAMS FROM
OUR PBS COLLEAGUES.
GWEN IFILL IS PREPARING FOR
"WASHINGTON WEEK," WHICH AIRS
LATER THIS EVENING.
HERE'S A PREVIEW:
>> Ifill: THE POLITICS OF
PROVOCATION TAKES CENTER STAGE,
AS REPUBLICAN CANDIDATES FOR
PRESIDENT PREPARE FOR THEIR
FIRST DEBATE.
WE EXAMINE THE PUSH AND PULL, AS
DONALD TRUMP RIDES AT THE TOP OF
THE POLLS.
AND ON CAPITOL HILL, RACING
AGAINST DEADLINES OVER CRITICAL
TRANSPORTATION SPENDING, AND A
BIG NUCLEAR DEAL.
THAT'S ALL TONIGHT ON WASHINGTON
WEEK.
JUDY?
>> Woodruff: ON PBS NEWSHOUR
WEEKEND SATURDAY: HOME OR HOTEL?
HOW THE SHARING ECONOMY IS
CHANGING REAL ESTATE.
>> TWO YEARS AGO, JENNIFER AND
HER HUSBAND BEGAN LISTING THEIR
TWO-BEDROOM BROOKLYN APARTMENT
ON WHAT WAS THEN AN UP AND
COMING WEB SITE, AIRBNB, THEY
HAVE HOSTS TO SHARE HOMES SHORT
TERM.
WHAT SOUNDS LIKE A WENIJAN LIU
IS NOT SO SIMPLE.
WHAT JENNIFER IS DOING MAY BE
ILLEGAL IN NEW YORK CITY WHERE
CITY AND STATE LAWS RESTRICT
SHORT-TERM RENTALS.
>> Woodruff: THAT'S TOMORROW
NIGHT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
AND THAT'S THE NEWSHOUR FOR
TONIGHT.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
HAVE A GREAT WEEKEND.
THANK YOU AND GOOD NIGHT.